# GraphBLAS Languages Committee Meeting (on C++ API) - May 31, 2022

## Attendees
- [ ] Ben Brock
- [X] Scott McMillan
- [X] Tim Mattson
- [ ] Aydin Buluc
- [X] Jose Moreira

## Agenda
Discuss the idea of a SparseBLAS that is different from GraphBLAS shown in following code presented by Jose:

```
namespace spb
/*
 * This is the SparseBLAS part of GraphBLAS.
 */
{
    template<typename T> class BinaryOp
    {
	virtual	T	operator()(const T&, const T&) = 0;
    };

    template<typename T> class ArithmeticPlus : public BinaryOp<T>
    {
	T	operator()(const T& x, const T& y) { return x+y; }
    };

    template<typename T> class ArithmeticTimes : public BinaryOp<T>
    {
	T	operator()(const T& x, const T& y) { return x*y; }
    };

    template<typename T> class Matrix
    {
    };
}

spb::ArithmeticPlus<double>	plus_F64;
spb::ArithmeticTimes<double>	times_F64;

namespace srb
/*
 * This is the SemiringBLAS part of GraphBLAS.
 */
{
    template<typename T> class Semiring
    {
	public: 
	/*
	 * Constructs a semiring over domain T with the specified addition and multiplication operations.
	 * If the two operations do not form a semiring over T, the result is undefined.
	 */
	Semiring(const spb::BinaryOp<T>& addition, const spb::BinaryOp<T>& multiplication);

	spb::Matrix<T>	mxm(spb::Matrix<T>&, spb::Matrix<T>&);
	spb::Matrix<T>	eWiseAdd(spb::Matrix<T>&, spb::Matrix<T>&);
	spb::Matrix<T>	eWiseMult(spb::Matrix<T>&, spb::Matrix<T>&);
    };
}

srb::Semiring<double>	plus_times_F64(plus_F64, times_F64);
```

## Minutes

Jose's main points are as follows:

1.	This is not an API proposal. It is intended to illustrate my thinking. I am not well versed in modern C++ and this is an "old-fashioned" example.
2.	One of the components of GraphBLAS is the "Semiring BLAS". This is in addition to a more basic "Sparse BLAS" that defines containers like matrices and vectors, and basic algebraic objects such as binary operations.
3.	In the attached file, the basic "Sparse BLAS" corresponds to namespace "spb". The "Semiring BLAS" corresponds to namespace "srb". This is more for referring to the two components. I am not suggesting that they should be separate name spaces in the actual API.
4.	Semirings are constructed from a domain and two binary operations. If the binary operations do not form a semiring in the specified domain, the result of the constructor is undefined. (And, as a consequence, any use of the resulting object is undefined.)
5.	Matrix multiply (mxm), element-wise addition (eWiseAdd) and element-wise multiplication (eWiseMult) are methods of a semiring object. Their results will be well defined if the semiring is defined. Undefined otherwise.
6.	In my ideal scenario, only methods from the Semiring BLAS can have undefined behavior. All methods from Sparse BLAS would always produce defined results. The requirements for those methods should be enforced by syntax only. (For example, there should not be a requirement for a binary operation to be commutative. Leave that for the Semiring BLAS.)
7.	Yes, maybe we need a "Monoid BLAS" too, but we can have a lot of discussion without that :-)
Finally, here is a pragmatic recommendation for us to make progress: I think we should move ahead with defining the API without an explicit Semiring type. (I think this is Scott's view, but I should let him confirm.) Let us see where that take us. We can then evaluate what we got and decide if there would be be benefit from semiring classes.

