# GraphBLAS C++ Subcommittee Meeting

## Attendees
- [X] Ben Brock
- [X] Scott McMillan

## Agenda

We are planning to begin an *internal review phase* early next week.  The goal is to have language committee members read through the spec document.  We will then use that feedback to direct any changes ahead of a somewhat broader *external review phase* in the coming weeks ahead.

Rules for the *internal review phase*:

1. Focus on functionality.  Is there functionality in the C++ spec that is missing?

2. Focus on expressiveness.  Is there functionality that is there, but is cumbersome to use?  Is there a way to express things better?

3. Make notes about naming.  This is the least important aspect at this point, but note down names that you think could be improved for later discussion.

4. Make notes about implementation.  This is also a somewhat secondary issue at this point, but are there parts of the API that should be modified to make writing a fast implementation easier?

## Minutes

List of features to add to the API:

#### Critical (Functionality)

- [ ] Variants of `multiply`, `ewise_union`, and `ewise_intersection` that accept an output matrix

- [ ] Write introduction

- [X] Submatrix view

- [ ] Assign with mask as parameter? (Or should we let `mask_view` handle this?)

- [X] Add `erase` to `matrix` and `vector`

#### Minor

- [ ] Update views in the spec to mirror `std::ranges::views`

- [X] Define `grb::begin()`, `grb::end()`, `grb::find()`, `grb::insert()` in spec.

- [ ] Better specify CPOs.

### TODOs / Deliverables

- Look through matrix and vector methods in C API for missing functionality in C++ API

- Consider fill constructor for matrix and vector

- Scott to look at introduction / math material

#### Minor

- Aliasing issue with assign (assigning to self)

- Passing in Rvalue to range adapter

