# GraphBLAS Languages Committee Meeting (on C++ API) - July 12, 2022

## Attendees
- [ ] Ben Brock
- [X] Scott McMillan
- [X] Tim Mattson
- [X] Aydin Buluc
- [X] Jose Moreira

## Agenda

Continued to discuss Jose's proposal of using code as specification 

Let us consider some of the advantages of “spec as code”, particularly as specified in the example below:
1.	Two for the price of one. We will get both the spec and a reference implementation for the same amount of work.
2.	The spec can be tested. It is just code. When we test the reference implementation, we are testing the spec.
3.	The resulting spec will be much more concise. Compare the code below with the pages of text in the C API.
4.	It is less work for us. We will finish it quickly. Likely in time for SC22.
5.	Even foundational constructs such as the unordered iterators can be defined through code. (The iterator for an STL unordered set is also unordered.)
6.	Code is concrete. We can talk about line numbers and variable names and for loops. We know it is right when it works.
7.	If code is not clear we can always … improve it until it is. (You didn’t think I was going to say “add comments”, did you?)
8.	There are no API errors to define. If it compiles, it runs.
9.	We can even eliminate most execution errors. I suspect only “OUT_OF_MEMORY” and “PANIC” are truly necessary.


Here is the API being discussed for reference:

```
template <ConstMatrixView AMatrixType,
          ConstMatrixView BMatrixType,
          BinaryOp        BinaryOpType,
          BinaryOp        BinaryOpType
          >
auto multiply(AMatrixType  &&a,
              BMatrixType  &&b,
              BinaryOpType &&reduce,
              BinaryOpType &&combine);
```

An implementation must produce the same result as produced by an execution of the following reference implementation:

```
template <ConstMatrixView AMatrixType,
          ConstMatrixView BMatrixType,
          BinaryOp        BinaryOpType,
          BinaryOp        BinaryOpType
          >
auto multiply(AMatrixType  &&a,
              BMatrixType  &&b,
              BinaryOpType &&reduce,
              BinaryOpType &&combine)
{
    Matrix<reduce::TOUT> c;
    
    for (auto&& [a_index, a_value] : a)
    {
        auto&& [i,k] = a_index;
        for (auto&& [b_index, b_value] : b.row(k))
        {
            auto&& [k,j] = b_index;
            if (c.contains(i,j)) c(i,j) = reduce(c(i,j), combine(a_value, b_value));
            else c(i,j) = combine(a_value, b_value);
        }
    }

    return c;
}
```

Note 1: An implementation may require that the reduce binary operator be associative and/or commutative. In that case, the implementation must clearly state that requirement. A program that violates that requirement is considered noncompliant for that implementation.

Note 2: An implementation may assume floating-point arithmetic to have the properties of real number arithmetic. In that case, the implementation must clearly state that assumption and list the floating-point formats for which it is assumed.

## Minutes

-	We discussed Jose’s proposal about code as spec (abov).
    - Scott voiced concerns again about depending on a public API that may not exist v1.0 and is not sure should exist right now given that the data structures are opaque.  Ben and Scott specifically punted on things like ordered iterators for a number of reasons including the burden it would place on library writers to do it efficiently (they wanted to spend more time thinking about the implications).
       - But maybe the point is that a lower level public API on matrices and vectors needs to be expanded to support what Jose is suggesting. 
    - Tim supports basing the API spec on math requirements
    - Jose asserts that the code approach is less work.  
       - Scott is not sure that code reqs are less work depending on how much new API is required and whether or not we have spec language for the complexities.  For example, the code snippet also requires methods like a row accessor (“row(k)”) on matrices which possibly implies a partial ordering (maybe not if you just accept that row(k) is a view of the basic iterator and iterating over a row is O(m) complexity.
-	Scott’s initial purpose for examining the reducer in mxm was to try to firmly establish what would be required of that operator.
    - The majority consensus seems to be that we should require commutativity and associativity because:
       - That is what the C API required
       - It would be less work and we have an SC22 deadline
       - Scott points out that we can always make the operator less restrictive in the future without breaking backward compatibility
    - It still begs the question of whether or not we will require an identity value even though is would not be used in the code req’s
-	We ended the meeting with two Action Items:
    - Jose will expand the code example below to include optional accumulation and masking.
       - Scott suggested taking the approach that the sequential implementation of GBTL took and make it explicitly a 3 step process with T and Z intermediate matrices.
    - Scott and Tim need to estimate and rough draft what a separate math spec would look like.
       - The consensus opinion was that both spec committees (C and C++ and maybe other languages) should build their language API specs on this new math document
       - Scott thinks that extracting the optional accumulation and masking steps into their own sections could significantly reduce the size of the spec.

## Conversation about error codes after the meeting

We did not get a chance to discuss all the items and Scott wanted to dig in on #8 briefly:

The following API errors will either go away are become compile time errors:

1.	UNINITIALIZED_OBJECT – RAII idioms should ensure that only constructed objects are used (anything else would be blatant programmer error)
2.	NULL_POINTER – no pointers should be used (but if they are it is on the programmer)
3.	DOMAIN_MISMATCH – this is replaced by the compilers ability to reason about casting types (it can’t generate code if the casting is not supported or is ambiguous).

Applying to the following is possible but would have significant impact on the design philosophy:

4.	DIMENSION_MISMATCH
o	The only way to get the compiler to perform dimension checks is to make them part of the type of matrices and vectors.  That basically means that the dimensions must be part of the template arguments.
	This has been done in the C++ Standard Library with the array container (https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/array)
o	Since the dimension becomes a compile time constant and cannot be changed, there would be no resizing in-place.
5.	INVALID_INDEX: Getting the compiler to complain some of these errors would require the same change for Vector and Matrix methods that get, set and remove single elements.
o	In the case of extract or assign operations, however, making this a compile-time error is not possible (the values must support being set at runtime)

The following I believe cannot be caught by the compiler because they are dependent on the runtime data or something else:

6.	OUTPUT_NOT_EMPTY – data dependent
7.	INVALID_VALUE – most instances are runtime data dependent
8.	NOT_IMPLEMENTED – survives for obvious reasons if the implementers need wiggle room

Ben responded with some additions:

Here's my take on these errors: I generally agree with everything you've outlined here in terms of the types of errors we should throw.  In addition, I would propose that the specific errors we throw should be modeled closely after C++ STL data structures (`vector` and `map`).  Personally I think just about everything should be an exception.  These errors should be rare (typically the result of an incorrect program), and will likely never be caught by the user.

I agree about DIMENSION_MISMATCH---it should trigger some kind of runtime error.  I personally think this is a great use case for an exception, since this should happen rarely and almost never be caught.  (examples: user multiplies the wrong two matrices by mistake; user tries to read in the wrong Matrix Market file and the dimensions don't match.)

As for INVALID_INDEX, I think this should either throw an exception (as with the `at` method) or result in undefined behavior, as in `operator[]`.  There are well-defined and understood behaviors here in `std::vector` and `std::unordered_map` that we can directly follow.

INVALID_VALUE - I think the only place in which this survives might be if we disallow vectors and matrices of dimension 0.  Personally I have no problem with matrices of dimension 0, in which case I think we might not need this.

NOT_IMPLEMENTED - we could consider making this a compile-time warning.
