# GraphBLAS Languages Committee Meeting (on C++ API) - July 5, 2022

## Attendees
- [ ] Ben Brock
- [X] Scott McMillan
- [X] Tim Mattson
- [X] Aydin Buluc
- [X] Jose Moreira

## Agenda

Discuss Jose's proposal of using code as specification 

Here is the API being discussed for reference:

```
template <ConstMatrixView AMatrixType,
          ConstMatrixView BMatrixType,
          BinaryOp        BinaryOpType,
          BinaryOp        BinaryOpType
          >
auto multiply(AMatrixType  &&a,
              BMatrixType  &&b,
              BinaryOpType &&reduce,
              BinaryOpType &&combine);
```

An implementation must produce the same result as produced by an execution of the following reference implementation:

```
template <ConstMatrixView AMatrixType,
          ConstMatrixView BMatrixType,
          BinaryOp        BinaryOpType,
          BinaryOp        BinaryOpType
          >
auto multiply(AMatrixType  &&a,
              BMatrixType  &&b,
              BinaryOpType &&reduce,
              BinaryOpType &&combine)
{
    Matrix<reduce::TOUT> c;
    
    for (auto&& [a_index, a_value] : a)
    {
        auto&& [i,k] = a_index;
        for (auto&& [b_index, b_value] : b.row(k))
        {
            auto&& [k,j] = b_index;
            if (c.contains(i,j)) c(i,j) = reduce(c(i,j), combine(a_value, b_value));
            else c(i,j) = combine(a_value, b_value);
        }
    }

    return c;
}
```

Note 1: An implementation may require that the reduce binary operator be associative and/or commutative. In that case, the implementation must clearly state that requirement. A program that violates that requirement is considered noncompliant for that implementation.

Note 2: An implementation may assume floating-point arithmetic to have the properties of real number arithmetic. In that case, the implementation must clearly state that assumption and list the floating-point formats for which it is assumed.


## Minutes

-	Jose said that code should be used to specify the behaviour of the operations instead of the math that is found in the current API specification.
-	Furthermore the 1D unordered iterators presented in our GrAPL paper should be used to define that behaviour (this is shown in the code for C=AB below).
-	A key point of the proposal is that “an execution” (meaning any) of the code is a valid result
    - Scott pointed out that if the order of the for loops is not defined, AND if the reduction operator is not commutative and associative then many different possible values would then be deemed valid
        - If the operator is not commutative and the order that products are reduce is indeterminate, then the results can vary with each execution
        - Further, If the operator is not associative, then different divisions of divide-and-conquer will produce different results.
-	Tim and Scott did not think this was the correct approach
    - Response #1: we require commutativity and associativity of reducer and use this code as the spec (but Scott wants to allow less restrictions)
    - Response #2: we should impose more requirements to the iteration order in order to allow more options (but Tim does not what a spec in terms of code, and Scott says there is a lot of work involved in (i) specifying more types of iteration, and (ii) implementing more types of iteration, and there is upcoming work on multi-dimensional iteration in the C++ ISO community that could be leveraged in a later version of the spec
    - Response #3: the spec should be in terms of the math, and the spec should have to be in terms of the 1D iterator we are proposing.

-	Scott’s response: 
    - This issue is about what order elements in the nested for-loops are visited:
        - ```for (auto&& [a_index, a_value] : a) 
            for (auto&& [b_index, b_value] : b.row(k))```
        - These two loops basically define the order in which the elements of the intersection sets described by the summation math get processed on line 2953 of the C API Specification V2.0.0
        - Note: If the intersection set of the math is unordered then this math also requires that the reducer op be associative and commutative (which is what the C API required).
    - Scott’s proposal is to keep this math (instead of Jose’s code)..but add a few extra requirements on the intersection set.  For example:
        - If \oplus is commutative and associative there is no order imposed on the summation
        - If \oplus is non-commutative and non-associative, the intersection set must be processed sequential in order of increasing k
        - If \oplus is non-commutative and associative, the relative order is still increasing but blocks of contiguous elements can be processed in parallel and the partial results must be reduced in the correct order
        - Etc
        - If \oplus has a defined annihilator then any time the current partial reduction computes to the annihilator value, the reduction can be short circuited
        - Etc (again) 
    - Scott’s opinion: By specifying the math instead of code, we get the following benefits:
        - we put more restrictions on what is considered a valid execution that is more in line with what math requires
        - we sidestep the issue of requiring specific code constructs (like ordered iteration, or hierarchical iteration) that Ben and Scott feel are beyond the scope of the v1.0 API, and perhaps a bit premature given that the C++ ISO committee are debating similar issues that could be leveraged with a later adoption by the GraphBLAS spec.



## Conversation after the meeting

Tim Mattson wrote an email pushing for using math as spec as was done in the C API.

Jose's position:

I realize that my proposal is radically different from the way we did things with the C API. And that is why it deserves some investigation.

Let us consider some of the advantages of “spec as code”, particularly as specified in the example below:
1.	Two for the price of one. We will get both the spec and a reference implementation for the same amount of work.
2.	The spec can be tested. It is just code. When we test the reference implementation, we are testing the spec.
3.	The resulting spec will be much more concise. Compare the code below with the pages of text in the C API.
4.	It is less work for us. We will finish it quickly. Likely in time for SC22.
5.	Even foundational constructs such as the unordered iterators can be defined through code. (The iterator for an STL unordered set is also unordered.)
6.	Code is concrete. We can talk about line numbers and variable names and for loops. We know it is right when it works.
7.	If code is not clear we can always … improve it until it is. (You didn’t think I was going to say “add comments”, did you?)
8.	There are no API errors to define. If it compiles, it runs.
9.	We can even eliminate most execution errors. I suspect only “OUT_OF_MEMORY” and “PANIC” are truly necessary.

