# GraphBLAS Languages Committee Meeting (on C++ API) - June 28, 2022

## Attendees
- [ ] Ben Brock
- [X] Scott McMillan
- [X] Tim Mattson
- [ ] Aydin Buluc
- [X] Jose Moreira

## Agenda

Today, we limited our conversation to what should be required of a reducer in the context of mxm (but it also applies to mxv, vxm, and reduce).  

Here is the API being discussed for reference:

```
template <ConstMatrixView AMatrixType,
          ConstMatrixView BMatrixType,
          BinaryOp        ReduceType = std::plus<>,  //All three types the same?
          BinaryOp        CombineType = std::multiplies<>,
          MaskMatrixView  MaskType = grb::full_mask<>
          > //requires the types relationship???
auto multiply(AMatrixType &&a,
              BMatrixType &&b,
              ReduceType  &&reduce  = ReduceType(),
              CombineType &&combine = CombineType(),
              MaskType    &&mask    = MaskType()); // or grb::full_mask());
```

## Minutes

We were are discussing the requirements with respect to the “elemental” (atomic?) mathematical properties: associativity, commutativity, identity, annihilator,…

We only discussed whether or not we should require associativity:
-	We all agreed that deterministic reduction can be implemented without associtativity.  Tim asserts (and Scott believes) that this forces a purely sequential implementation (i.e., parallelism requires associativity).
-	The question then becomes what is the burden on implementors if the API requires support for non-associative reducers?
    - Scott believes the burden is greatest on distributed implementors and perhaps GPU implementation.  Meaning these groups are least likely to even want to consider a sequential implementation.

We discuss how associativity might be implemented/checked:
-	An associativity type trait could be implemented and all known built-in operators could be defined as associative, and implementations could ask about it
    - Exception: We would want to say that floating point operations are associative (even though they aren’t)
-	What happens if mxm requires associativity and the operator is not?
    - We could perform a compile time check of the trait and not compile
-	What happens if mxm does not require associativity
    1.	All implementations would have to implement a strictly sequential version
    2.	OR allow the COP-OUT clause:  implementors could choose to not implement the non-associative version.  The behaviour could be implemented two different ways
        a.	Compile time: the implementors mxm requires associativity and does not compile otherwise.
        b.	Run time: the implementor uses the trait to implement two different functions and the non-associative one throws a NOT_IMPLEMENTED exception
-	The associativity trait could be defined for user-defined operators, what happens if the user does this for a non-associative function?
    - Undefined behaviour could result.
    - Jose asks is this bounded undefined behaviour or not


The COP-OUT clause (number 2 above) is where the conversation was starting to converge to.  But this is a foundational API design philosophy that we need a unanimous decision on how we will proceed. 


Aside for later: Jose mentioned that specifying undefined behaviour can be tricky.  We will need to revisit these terms:
-	Syntax guaranteed
-	Undefined
-	Bounded undefined 

Aydin sent the following statement:

But regarding non-associativity; it is hard but not completely impossible afaik: https://project-archive.inf.ed.ac.uk/msc/20172484/msc_proj.pdf

In this document, we have presented an algorithm for the derivation of a tree-parallel implementation to sequential reductions with non-associative operators, with an associated implementation for the Lift compiler. In addition to the transformation, we have designed a series of addition to Lift to integrate the transformation with the rest of the language better, and we have provided implementations for some of these additions. Moreover, through a series of comparisons with unoptimised Lift code and equivalent handwritten implementations for other platforms, we have established the usefulness of the approach
