# GraphBLAS Languages Committee Meeting (on C++ API) - August 2, 2022

## Attendees
- [X] Ben Brock
- [X] Scott McMillan
- [ ] Tim Mattson
- [ ] Aydin Buluc
- [X] Jose Moreira

## Agenda

1. Reviewed the writeup for the current set of concepts, and present some of the views

## Minutes

The following concepts were reviewed.  
- It was noted that these are wrappers around matrix objects with storage and any mutations done to the underlying container would be reflected in the view.  
- Question: would any structure changing mutations to the underlying object also invalidate the iterators on the view.

1. `grb::transpose_view<[Mutable]MatrixRange M> grb::transpose(M&&)`
   - this can currently take and produce a MutableMatrixRange.  That means that the output matrix could be transposed in this fashion which doubles the number of possible code paths to implement efficiently (but it does not necessarily double the amount of code).
2. `grb::transform_view<MatrixRange M, typename Fn> grb::transform(M&&, Fn&&)`
   - This is like a functional apply operation and support index unary operators.
   - It does not produce a mutable view
3. `grb::structure_view<MatrixRange M> grb::structure(M&&)` (there is a Vector variant)
   - iterators on a structure view return all stored locations in the underlying matrix with the explicity value `true'
4. `grb::complement_view<MaskMatrixRange M> grb::complement(M&&)`  (there is a Vector variant)
   - A longer discussion was held regarding which elements should be iterated over in a complement view.
   - Scott pointed out that the C API already defined a 'concept' for masks: the contents of a mask, M (denoted L(M)) in the C API spec was defined as only those elements that allow writing.
   - If we carry the C API definition of the mask concept over to the C++ API, then an iterator over a complement_view will visit all locations that:
       - did not have a stored value in the underlying matrix
       - had a stored value in the underlying matrix that evaluated to false
   - Question: why does this view only take MaskMatrixRange?
   
## Postmortem

The part of the discussion on complement_view about the concept of a Mask in the C API begs the question of whether we need a vanilla mask_view for default masks that skip stored `false`s?
