# GraphBLAS Languages Committee Meeting (on C++ API) - July 19, 2022

## Attendees
- [X] Ben Brock
- [X] Scott McMillan
- [X] Tim Mattson
- [ ] Aydin Buluc
- [X] Jose Moreira

## Agenda

1. Catch up with Ben
2. Catch Ben up
3. Decide on SC22 for draft release

## Minutes

1.	We have a lot to do prior to SC22 and will have to punt a number things “down the road.”  If we want to have a complete draft.
   -	Latex vs Markdown was discussed (no progress)        

2.	The C API subcommittee agrees with the need for a shared math spec so that the different language committees do not need to redefine that part
   -	Will Kimmerer wants to participate.
   -	We think maybe the first step is to extract the math from the C API spec and reorganize and unify with the “Mathematical Foundations…” paper
   -	Latex vs. HTML was discussed (no progress)
   -	Tim is to reach out to Jeremy Kepner to gauge interest in participating
   -	Scott is to create a new repo for the math spec and commit what he has done so far.

3.	Reducer concept discussion:
   -	We discussed the merits of various C++ concepts for the reducer operator on GraphBLAS operations like mxm.
   -	The pros and cons of just leaving it BinaryOp and documenting in prose that if commutativity and associativity is violated then undefined behaviour results.
   -	The pros and cons of Commutative or Associative tags was discussed.
        - If we go this route the spec needs to enumerate all of the operators (composed with three types) that satisfy these properties
        - Ben also pointed out that some in the C++ community are also grappling with the definition of similar concepts.
   -	The consensus was to “punt” on the math property tags for now and define undefined behaviour, and wait to see if we can borrow from potential standardized items in the future to prohibit compilation rather than allow UB. 
   -	No action items were discussed before the meeting abruptly ended due to time.


